Introduction
The 1988 Anfal (“Spoils”) operations, conducted by the Iraqi regime
against part of the Kurdish population and other minority groups living
in Northern Iraq, are among the best- documented cases of genocide.
Ostensibly a counterinsurgency measure against Kurdish rebels, they in
fact involved the deliberate killing of large numbers of non- combatants.
Captured documents prove the regime’s genocidal intent: they make

abundantly clear that the government aimed at killing (Kurdish) civil-
ians. Estimates of the number of civilians killed in the operations vary

from 50,000 to almost 200,000; the number of displaced or otherwise
affected persons is far greater. Over 1,000 Kurdish villages were
destroyed in the operations, as were their livestock and orchards. The

operations are characterized by an unusual degree of secretive bureau-
cratic organization and centralized implementation, rather than by the

mobilization of popular antagonisms. Because they are documented not
only by eyewitness and survivor testimonies, but also by a vast number

of captured Iraqi government documents, they provide one of the juridi-
cally most strongly and unambiguously established cases of genocide.

Although there is abundant and publicly accessible documentary evi-
dence on the Anfal, little substantial research has been published since

the publication of the Human Rights Watch 1993 report Genocide in
Iraq, which was republished in 1995 as Iraq’s Crime of Genocide. This
all- important study was based on extensive interviews with survivors,

but also on an incomplete (and possibly imbalanced) archive of docu-
mentary evidence made available by some of the Kurdish parties. In the

absence of more recent studies, it is impossible to assess whether any
documentary evidence that was later recovered might necessitate a revision of its main findings. Hence, the factual account of the operations
given below is largely based on this, for now, indispensable study.
Underlying Causes of the Anfal
Three main historical trends may be seen as leading up to the Anfal
operations: the so- called “Kurdish question”; the character of Saddam
Hussein’s Baath regime; and the Iran–Iraq war that broke out in 1980.
First, there was the failure of successive Iraqi governments to find an
adequate and enduring settlement of the Kurdish question (ever since
the formation of the independent state of Iraq, there had been disagreements about the precise relationship between the central, Arab- led government in Baghdad and the predominately Kurdish- inhabited regions
in the north of the country; put another way, the precise political, economic, and cultural status of the Kurdish regions of Iraq was an ongoing
point of contention). During the 1960s, episodes of diplomatic activity
between the Baghdad government and the political leadership of the
Kurds had alternated with Kurdish armed uprisings and their suppression by Iraqi military force; in March 1970, an agreement between the
Kurdish leadership and the Iraqi government had been signed, but this
was quickly seen as a dead letter. In 1974 a full- scale war broke out
between the Baghdad regime and the Kurdish movement led by Barzani,
and it was not until Saddam Hussein signed an agreement with the Shah
of Iran, which involved, among others, the latter withdrawing all support
for the Iraqi Kurds, that the Kurdish front collapsed.
 A second underlying trend was the Baath regime’s character, in particular its harsh ways of dealing with any kind of opposition or treason,
whether real, suspected, or imaginary. For example, during the 1970s,
the regime engaged in the violent persecution of not only Kurds, but
also Shiites living in the South of Iraq, and of members of the Iraqi
Communist Party, with which the Baath Party had earlier, in 1972,
formed an alliance through the establishment of a National Front.
 The style of Baathist rule was based on Eastern European and, more
specifically, Stalinist models. Not only was the Kurdish autonomous
region unilaterally established in 1970 by the Baghdad regime modeled
on the autonomous okrugs that had been established in the early Soviet
Union; more generally, Saddam carefully modeled his rule after Stalin’s
government- by-terror. As a result, Saddam Hussein’s rule over Iraq,
effective since the early 1970s and officially consecrated after a 1979
coup in which Saddam ousted president and fellow Baathist Ahmad
Hasan al- Bakr, systematically relied on purges, show trials, disappearances, and collective forms of punishment against whole families, tribes,

villages, or population groups. It also relied on a considerable overlap
between party organization and security apparatus, aimed at strengthening its total control of the country. Baathist policies toward the Kurds in
the wake of the 1975 collapse of resistance had involved, among others,
the forcible resettlement of several hundred thousand Kurds in the south
of Iraq; the settlement of Arabs in predominantly Kurdish- inhabited
areas; and the establishment of prohibited zones with a shoot- on-sight
policy along the borders with Iran and Turkey. Collectively, these measures went far beyond counterinsurgency; they also aimed at changing
the ethnic balance of the region, and at weakening, if not destroying,
Kurdish ethnic identity.
 The third long- term trend that led to the Anfal was the 1980–1988
war between Iran and Iraq. Repeatedly, the course of this protracted war
in time made the Baath regime fear for its very existence; moreover, the
Iraqi Kurdish parties played an ambiguous role, alternatively entering
into negotiations with Baghdad and siding with the Iranians, not to
mention the frequent infighting and realignments among the various
opposition groups. Iraq’s predicament was especially bleak in 1987, as
Iran appeared to be regaining momentum after reopening its northern
front in March in collusion with Iraqi Kurdish guerrillas. Moreover, in
the course of 1987, the major Iraqi Kurdish parties, including the
Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), headed by Massoud Barzani, and
the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), headed by Jalal Talabani,
decided to join forces, ending their long- standing differences and years
of infighting. The Kurds’ tactical alliance with Iran posed a new threat to
the Iraqi regime, which reacted by implementing increasingly drastic
counterinsurgency measures. In response, on March 29, Iraqi President
Saddam Hussein promulgated decree No. 160, making Ali Hasan alMajid director of the Baath Party’s Directorate of Northern Affairs,
which was responsible for the autonomous Kurdish region in northern
Iraq. Al- Majid, until then the director of General Security, was granted
sweeping powers over all civilian, military, and security institutions of
the region. He wasted no time in making use of them. In April he
ordered the first attacks, including chemical bombardments, not only
against the PUK mountain headquarters but also against the Kurdish
villagers and villages that could provide the PUK with shelter and supplies. During this campaign, at least 703 Kurdish villages were
destroyed.
 After a few months, however, these operations were discontinued, possibly because the Iraqi army was too preoccupied with Iranian offensives.
But al- Majid’s June 1987 directives present a clear indication of what was
to come. His order, Document 28/3650, dated June 3, imposed both a total
blockade and a shoot- on-sight policy on the areas outside government   
control: “The armed forces must kill any human being or animal present
within these areas.” Document 28/4008 of June 20 provides a standing
order for the summary execution of all (male) captives: “Those between
the ages of 15 and 70 shall be executed after any useful information has
been obtained from them.” In part, these documents reaffirmed, and probably reinvigorated, standing Iraqi policies that had been in place since the
late 1970s. (Note: both documents are reproduced in Human Rights
Watch/Middle East’s Bureaucracy of Repression [1994].)
 The next organizational step toward Anfal was the nationwide census
that was held on October 17, 1987. According to Human Rights Watch,
this census was (at least in the Kurdish North) less a registration of population data than a sweeping government directive that not only identified the target population of the future operations, but also
indiscriminately marginalized and criminalized it. All traffic to and from
areas outside government control was forbidden, and relatives of alleged
saboteurs were expelled from government- held areas. All individuals
who consequently failed to participate in the census were stripped of
their citizenship and were considered deserters or saboteurs who
deserved the death penalty. It has not yet, however, been established
beyond doubt precisely where these forbidden zones outside government control were located, how they were defined, and whether they
coincided with the areas where the Anfal did in fact take place. At the
time, only a few stretches of land in inaccessible mountain areas and
along the border with Iran were wholly out of government reach.
 Apart from this gradual escalation of counterinsurgency violence,
there are two well- documented precedents or cases—not, strictly speaking, related to the Anfal—that indicate the Iraqi regime’s readiness to
resort to the killing of Kurds, as such: the 1983 disappearance of Barzani
clansmen and the 1988 chemical attack against Halabja. The background
of both incidents crucially involves not only to the armed Kurdish insurgency, but also the Iraqi war against Iran. After the 1975 collapse of the
Kurdish front, hundreds of thousands of Kurdish villagers had already
been deported to relocation camps or mujamma’at, their traditional
dwellings having been destroyed and declared forbidden territory. Thousands of members of the Barzani clan had been deported to southern
Iraq in 1976. In 1981 they had been relocated in the Qushtepe
mujamma’a just south of Arbil; and then, in 1983, after Iran had captured the border town of Haj Omran with the aid of KDP guerrillas, the
Iraqi government took its revenge on the Barzani clan. According to the
then speaker of the KDP, Hoshyar Zebari (at present Iraq’s foreign
minister), over 8,000 men were taken from the Qushtepe camp and
never seen again; the remaining women were reduced to a life of abject
poverty. Apparently, government policies not only aimed at the physical
elimination of Kurds associated with disloyal elements, but also aimed
at the symbolic destruction of the honor of both the male and female
members of the proud Barzani tribe.
 It is the March 16, 1988 chemical attack against the town of Halabja,
in which an estimated 5,000 Kurdish civilians died a gruesome death,
rather than the Anfal, that has entered collective memory as a symbol of
the Iraqi repression of the Kurds. The attack was captured, if not symbolized, in the indelible image of a Kurdish father clutching his infant
son, both killed by poison gas, shot by the Turkish- Kurdish photographer Ramazan Öztürk. Although the Halabja attack was not part of
the Anfal operations proper (which only targeted rural areas, not cities),
it certainly followed the same destructive logic. It was prompted by the
Kurdish–Iranian occupation of the city as an attempt to ease the pressure on the PUK headquarters, which at the time was bearing the brunt
of the first Anfal operation. The chemical attack does not appear to have
had any clear strategic aim, however; rather, it was in all likelihood
meant as a warning—or, it was possibly conducted as an act of revenge.
After the attack, nothing happened to Halabja for several months. It was
not until July 1988 that Iraqi troops reoccupied the city, which they then
proceeded to demolish. The remaining population was relocated to
“New Halabja” mujamma’a, a few miles down the road.
The Course of the Operations
As for the Anfal operations proper, they did not begin until February
1988; presumably, by then, the Iraqi regime felt that Iranian pressure
had eased sufficiently to allow for the redeployment of large numbers of
troops to the north. The Anfal operations were conducted on a much
larger scale and were of a much more systematic character than the
spring 1987 operations: several army divisions participated in them,
together with personnel of general intelligence and the Baath Party—
along with Kurdish irregulars (also referred to as jash). In the course of
the 1980s, the Baath government, whose military forces were drawn to
the frontline with Iran, had established Kurdish irregular troops to
maintain control in the rural areas of the north. Numerous jash leaders,
though, maintained contacts with the Kurdish insurgents.
 The first Anfal operation, starting February 23, was primarily directed
against the PUK headquarters near the Iranian border, but it also
extended to surrounding villages. Most villagers, however, appear to
have escaped into Iran or to the larger cities of the Kurdish region in
Iraq. Thus, whether by accident or design, the first Anfal does not appear
to have involved the large- scale disappearance of civilians. This,
however, was to change in the following operations.
In the following months, seven further operations were carried out,
systematically targeting the different areas that had remained under
Kurdish control. The attacks were generally carried out in the same way:
typically, they started with surrounding the target area, which was then
exposed to massive shelling and air attacks, including the use of chemical weapons. Apparently, these attacks were intended primarily to
destroy the morale of the villagers and guerrillas (who had long become
used to conventional bombardments). Next, with the target population
dislodged, government forces would gradually encircle it and mount a
massive ground attack by army troops and irregulars—or, alternatively,
irregulars would persuade the villagers to surrender.
 The Kurdish captives were first brought to local collection points,
mostly by Kurdish irregulars; subsequently, government personnel took
them to centralized transit camps at military bases near Kirkuk, Tikrit,
and Duhok. Here, they were divided by age and gender, and stripped of
their remaining possessions. The vast majority of captured male adults
were loaded onto windowless trucks and taken to execution sites in
central Iraq. Several people, however, survived these mass executions.
All of them report having seen rows of trenches dug by bulldozers, each
holding hundreds of corpses. It is more than likely that tens of thousands of Kurdish male civilians were massacred in this way, merely on
account of their Kurdish ethnicity and of their living in an area declared
out of bounds by the regime of Saddam Hussein.
 Unknown numbers of women, children, and elderly are also
believed to have been massacred. More typically, however, women
were left alive and relocated. There also is credible testimony that
many younger women were sold off as brides, or rather into virtual
slavery, to rich men elsewhere—not only in Iraq, but also in Kuwait
and Saudi Arabia. These reports were corroborated by a December
1989 document, which the Kurds claimed to have captured from
Kirkuk’s Directorate of Intelligence following the 2003 ousting of
Saddam Hussein’s regime by the U.S. government. The memorandum
to the Baghdad General Directorate of Intelligence, marked “Top
Secret,” states that a group of girls aged between 14 and 29 had been
captured during the Anfal operations, and “sent to the harems and
nightclubs of the Arab Republic of Egypt.” (Note: A copy of the document and a partial translation can be found at www.kurdmedia.com/
news.asp?id=4057.)
 Many elderly captives were initially resettled in the Nuqrat al- Salman
concentration camp in southern Iraq. In the appalling living conditions
there, up to 10% of the inmates may have died in the space of a few
months. Often, corpses did not receive a proper burial and were left
exposed in the summer heat (see Account 5, below).
On August 20, 1988, a cease- fire between Iran and Iraq came into
effect. The Iraqi army now had its hands free to finish its campaign
against the Kurdish insurgents. On August 25 it initiated the final
Anfal, directed against what remained of the traditional KDP strongholds in the Badinan region bordering on Turkey. This area was not
entirely sealed off, however, and over 60,000 Kurds managed to escape
to Turkey. Following this exodus, substantial eyewitness reports about
the Iraqi regime’s continuing chemical attacks against its Kurdish
civilians reached the international community, along with earlier
journalistic reporting on the Halabja attack (see below). Press coverage led to some minor and inconsequential protests by Western governments. Among others, the U.S. government failed to act on reports
published by one of its own officials—U.S. Senate Foreign Relations
Committee member Peter Galbraith. In international forums like the
UN Security Council, the Iraqis avoided condemnation by cleverly
manipulating remaining Cold War cleavages and existing fears of
Iran.
 The violence against the Kurdish civilian population did not end with
the successful completion of the final Anfal. Numerous refugees were
lured back by the September 6 announcement of a general amnesty for
all Iraqi Kurds, but many of them disappeared upon returning. The fate
of the returning members of minority groups like the Yezidis and Assyrian Christians deserves particular mention. Unbeknown to themselves,
these groups had been excluded from the amnesty by the government,
which considered them Arabs rather than Kurds. Upon returning to
Iraq, they were separated from the Muslim Kurds, and many of them,
including women, children, and elderly, were taken to unknown destinations and never seen again.
 After the amnesty, the surviving deportees were brought back to the
north and simply dumped on relocation sites near the main roads to
the region’s major cities, surrounded by barbed- wire fences. Unlike the
victims of most earlier deportations, they were not provided with any
housing, construction materials, food, or medicine (let alone financial
compensation), but just left to their own devices.
 There were significant differences in the execution of the successive
Anfal operations. In the first Anfal, few non- combatants disappeared. In
later operations, adult males were taken to mass execution sites far away
from the Kurdish region. In the final Anfal, captured men were often
executed on the spot. Likewise, only in the operations in the Kirkuk
region do women and children appear to have been executed. It is not
clear whether such variations reflect an escalating logic of violence, a differentiated reaction to the degree of resistance encountered, or simply
the whims of local field commanders.
The captured documents not only show a high degree of secrecy surrounding the operations, but also hint at an extreme concentration of
power, and the bureaucratic structure that made them possible. There
are indications, for example, that military intelligence did not know precisely what was going on and that lower army officers on various occasions balked at the standing order to execute all of the captives.
 In the operations, the Kurdish irregular troops, or jash (“donkey
foal”) as they are disparagingly called among Kurds, played an important but ambiguous role. For many Kurds, enlisting as an irregular was a
convenient means of escaping active front duty in the war with Iran
(and of making a living). Other tribal leaders siding with the government, however, had their own accounts to settle with either the Kurdish
parties or with tribes and villages in nearby areas.
 The Kurdish irregulars appear to have had a subordinate status
among the personnel involved in the operations. While they had a better
knowledge of the mountainous territory than the regular security forces
and could more easily persuade the population to surrender, not all of
them were wholly reliable in the implementation of al- Majid’s orders.
 It is also unlikely that all irregular troops were equally well informed
about the operations’ true character. Apparently, many of them had
merely been told to help in the rounding up of villagers for the purpose
of relocation. Many, in fact, made a genuine effort to help the captives.
Others, however, participated with glee in the rounding up of civilians
and the looting of their possessions. In some cases, the irregular troops
granted those Kurds they rounded up acts of clemency if provided a
bribe to do so. A better appreciation of the role of the jash is hampered
to some extent by the fact that after the 1991 uprising in the north, all
(powerful) government collaborators were granted a general amnesty by
the Iraqi Kurdistan Front, and most of them continued to wield considerable power under the new Kurdish rulers. In other words, their previous actions against their own people were conveniently overlooked.
 In the spring of 1989, al- Majid resigned as the Baath Party’s Northern
Bureau chief. To all appearances, the Kurdish insurgency had been
solved once and for all. The major Kurdish parties had been thoroughly
demoralized, and indeed discredited, by the government’s brutal actions,
and they faced fierce internal criticism because of their tactics, which
had left the civilian population exposed to the Iraqi onslaught. Virtually
the entire surviving rural Kurdish population had been violently pacified
and relocated to easily controlled resettlement camps.
 In 1988, Anfal operations alone, an estimated 1,200 Kurdish villages
were destroyed. The number of civilian casualties has been variously estimated: Kurdish sources, based on extrapolations from the numbers of villages destroyed, at first spoke of some 182,000 people killed or missing. 
Human Rights Watch, a major international human rights organization,
made a more conservative estimate of between 50,000 and 100,000 civilian
dead. During the spring 1991 negotiations between the Kurds and the
Iraqi government, the director of the operations, al- Majid himself, at one
point exclaimed: “What is this exaggerated figure of 182,000? It could not
have been more than a hundred thousand!”
Impact of the Anfal
The operations had a devastating effect not only on the Kurdish parties,
ostensibly the main target of the operations, but also on the local population at large. In some of the operations, Kurdish forces had put up a
fierce resistance; but they were unable to counter the demoralizing effect
of chemical weapons, or to protect the local civilian population. After
the end of the operations, some prominent members of the main parties
called for soul searching and self- criticism, questioning if they had not
exposed the population to unacceptable risks.
 Among the Kurdish population at large, and also among Arab civilians and even among some government officials, there had been a few
but significant episodes of resistance and of support for the victims. In
the third Anfal, for example, the local population of Chamchamal rose
up in revolt against the deportation of villagers. During the fifth, resistance of the peshmergas (Kurdish guerrillas) turned out to be so strong
that two further operations against the same area were mounted,
keeping government forces occupied for over three months.
 Especially in Arbil, the local urban population, at times at great personal risk to themselves, made a prolonged effort to help the deported
villagers. Several survivors of the executions, notably Taymur ‘Abdallah
from Kulajo near Kifri and Ako Izzedin Sayyid Ismael from Warani near
Tuz Khormatu, were harbored by Iraqi army personnel or Arab tribesmen. (Note: for fragments of Taimour ‘Abdallah’s testimony, see
Account 3 below; for Ismael’s story, see www.globeandmail.com/servlet/
story/RTGAM.20030403.unolen0405/BNStory/International.)
 Among Iraq’s Kurdish population at large, the operations instilled a
pervasive fear of the regime. After the failure of the 1991 uprising, this
fear caused a massive panic and the exodus of hundreds of thousands of
Iraqi Kurds to the borders with Turkey and Iran. Following the establishment of a de facto autonomous Kurdish region in northern Iraq in
late 1991, however, the Anfal became a symbol of the total delegitimation of Baathist—and, by extension, Arab—rule over Iraq’s Kurds. No
trials of former Kurdish collaborators were ever conducted, however;
not even a truth commission was established, as had been done in other
places with a similarly violent and traumatic past.
The Anfal operations have had a particularly traumatic effect on
women. One significant aspect of the Anfal operations was their systematic differentiation by age and gender. Generally, though there were certainly exceptions, male youths and younger men would be rounded up
for execution, whereas women and the elderly would be relocated either
in the area or in the south of Iraq. In a recent study primarily based on
interviews with female Anfal survivors, Choman Hardi (2010) stressed
the need for a gendered view of the Anfal operations. She is particularly
critical of the dominant representations of Anfal widows in the Kurdish
media, which consistently depict them as mere victims with no life or
agency of their own beyond mourning lost relatives. All too often, she
notes, female survivors have been left to their own devices by the
Kurdish authorities; not infrequently, survivors of chemical attacks have
also been stigmatized as health hazards by their environment. Despite
such difficulties, Choman emphasizes, female Anfal survivors have been
“strong survivors,” developing various strategies of coping with trauma,
loss, poverty, and stigmatization.
Responses to the Anfal
The Iraqi regime made a sustained effort to keep the true nature of the
Anfal operations entirely secret, or at least to maintain strict control
over the flow of information. That said, throughout much of 1988, Iraqi
radio proudly broadcast news of the “heroic Anfal campaigns,” allegedly
directed against saboteurs and collaborators of Iran; but these reports
carefully avoided reference to the use of chemical weapons, the deportations and executions of civilians, and the razing of villages that accompanied the operations. On several occasions, victims of chemical attacks
were dragged out of the nearby hospitals and disappeared; this may have
been a form of collective punishment, but it is more likely that the
regime was attempting to eliminate all eyewitnesses at this stage.
 Despite several substantial investigations by journalists, academics,
and parliamentary committees, the extent of international knowledge of,
and indeed complicity in, Iraq’s crimes still awaits assessment. Various
European companies continued to supply Iraq with ingredients for
chemical weapons, even at a time when its use of such weapons against
the Iranian army was well documented. In the United States, the Reagan
and Bush Sr. Administrations actively supported Iraq with military advisors, equipment, and atropin (a common antidote to mustard gas), and
blocked international diplomatic initiatives against Iraq. It is by now
certain that the U.S. government at that time had detailed knowledge
about the campaign of destruction, of its scale, and of Iraq’s systematic
use of chemical weapons against its own civilians. In this regard, 
Meiselas (1997) has reproduced a Joint Chiefs of Staff document from
the National Security Archives, dated August 4, 1987, which speaks of a
campaign coordinated by al- Majid, in which 300 villages had been
destroyed, and of “the ruthless repression which also includes the use of
chemical weapons” (pp. 312–313). Likewise, former U.S. military intelligence officer Rick Francona (1999), who served as a military advisor to
the Iraqi regime in 1987 and 1988, asserts that the U.S. government was
well aware of Iraq’s use of chemical agents (in particular, nerve gas),
both against Iranian soldiers and against its own civilians, but wished to
prevent an Iranian victory at any price (cf. Hiltermann, 2007).
 Prior to the 2003 Iraq war, the chances for prosecution of the perpetrators of the Anfal were slim. In fact, Iraq’s well- established use of
weapons of mass destruction hardly figured in the justifications for that
war. That war itself was legitimized by Iraq’s alleged (and as it turned
out, imaginary) threat of weapons of mass destruction, rather than by its
actual use of such weapons in the 1980s. Following the invasion and
subsequent overthrow of the Baath regime, almost all senior members of
the Iraqi regime went into hiding. In due course, however, most of them
were captured, including the two who were held to bear primary
responsibility for the Anfal operations: former Iraqi president Saddam
Hussein and his cousin, Ali Hasan al- Majid. In late 2006 both were tried
by a local tribunal rather than the International Court of Justice. Saddam
was initially tried for his role in the 1982 Dujail massacre. Ultimately, he
was condemned to death for the latter crimes and was executed in
December 2006, before the Anfal trials had run their full course. In
January 2010, al- Majid was executed as well, having been convicted of
genocide for his role in the Anfal.
Interpretations of the Anfal
There is no definitive study of the Anfal operations as of yet; no balanced
or comprehensive assessment exists of the documentary and other evidence currently available. What little substantial research there is seems
to waver on how to qualify the attitude of the government that was
responsible for them. As noted above, labels like “racist” or “fascist”
have been used by Kurdish nationalist and foreign analysts; local Islamist voices point to the Anfal as evidence of the infidel (kafir) character of
Hussein’s regime. Such terms, however, are not very helpful in interpreting the operations, or even in characterizing the animus that drove
them. One thing seems clear, though: The Anfal operations were not the
culmination of any pervasive or long- standing ethnic antagonisms
between Kurdish and Arab population groups in Iraq, but rather the
result of centralized and highly secretive government policies. Regarding

the finer points of the character and significance of the Anfal, too little
detailed information is available at present to allow for anything more
than informed guesses.
 The Anfal operations cannot simply be explained away as a drastic
form of counterinsurgency; but, then again, characterizing the mindset
that made them possible is no easy task. The question of whether, and
how far, the Anfal operations were driven by racist animosity has not yet
adequately been answered. Racism does not appear to be a predominant
feature of either Iraqi society, Baathist ideology, or the perpetrators’ personalities. Although there have been, and are, occasional ethnic tensions
among the different segments of the Iraqi population, there is relatively
little grass- roots racial hatred between Kurds and Arabs in Iraq. Even
after the 2003 war, whatever tensions there were between Kurds, Arabs,
and Turkomans in the north paled in comparison with horrendous sectarian violence between Sunnis and Shiites in Baghdad (and this violence was mostly the work of urban gangs and militias, rather than of
the population at large).
 In official Baathist discourse, categories of loyalty, treason, and sabotage (which, ultimately, are of a Stalinist inspiration) are much more
prominent than ethnic or racial categories; the latter appear to have been
rather flexible items, given the Baath regime’s at times rather arbitrary
and voluntaristic way of creating and dissolving ethnic identities by
bureaucratic fiat. When overtly racist language was used, this typically
concerned Iranians and Jews rather than Kurds. Baathist ideology is of
an undeniably Arab nationalist character, but it has always been ambivalent as to the inclusion of Iraq’s sizable Kurdish population. There are
indications, however, that in the course of the 1980s, even the act of
stating one’s Kurdish or other non- Arab ethnicity increasingly became
treated as a criminal offence, if not an act of treason. For example,
smaller ethnic groups, such as Yezidis, Christians, and Shabak, were forcibly registered as Arabs, and when they changed their ethnicity to
“Kurdish” in the 1987 census, al- Majid had them deported and their villages destroyed.
 It is even questionable whether al- Majid himself can be simply labeled
a racist. On tape recordings of meetings with senior Party officials he can
be heard speaking in a coarse and derogatory manner of Kurds, but his
remarks hardly betray any generic hatred of Kurds as an inferior race;
rather, he speaks of saboteurs and of uneducated villagers who “live like
donkeys.” But whatever al- Majid’s personal motives and animosities,
official discourse consistently proclaimed both Kurds and Arabs as equal
parts of the Iraqi people or nation, on condition of their political loyalty.
 Religious considerations do not appear to have been a prime motivating or legitimating factor either. The name Anfal, or “Spoils,” which
 comes from the eighth sura of the Koran, has little specific religious significance here; rather, it appears to refer primarily to the right granted to
the Kurdish irregulars involved in the operations to loot the possessions
of the captured civilians. The Baath Party, which had ruled Iraq since
1968, is largely secular and was (and is) inspired more by 20th-century
ideologies and practices of Nazism and Stalinism than by any specifically
Islamic tradition.
 Of the violent and indeed murderous character of Baathist rule in
Iraq, however, there can be no doubt at all. After the conclusion of the
Anfal operations, only 673 Kurdish villages still stood in the whole of
Iraqi Kurdistan. Over the years, the regime had demolished 4,049
Kurdish villages in the north. After the end of the Iran–Iraq war and of
the Anfal operations proper, state violence increasingly turned toward
Kurdish cities.
 In the late spring and summer of 1988, the largely abandoned town of
Halabja was razed to the ground; and in June 1989, the city of Qala Diza,
with a population of close to 100,000, which had not been targeted in
the Anfal and was itself a site of relocation camps, was evacuated and
destroyed. It is impossible to tell where this process of repression and
destruction would have led if it had not been interrupted by the 1990
Gulf Crisis and the ensuing war and uprising.
Importance of and Current Interest in the Anfal
The Anfal operations formed the genocidal climax of the prolonged conflict between the successive Iraqi regimes and the Kurdish nationalist
movement. As previously noted, they were the result of highly centralized and secret government policies rather than widespread ethnic
antagonisms that could easily be manipulated or mobilized for political
purposes. As a result, the full extent and genocidal character of the
atrocities at first escaped public notice. The most notorious event of this
period, the widely publicized attack on Halabja in March 1988, was not
part of the Anfal proper; but it reflected the same mindset.
 The full scale and bureaucratic nature, and indeed full horror, of the
operations did not become widely known until the aftermath of the
1991 Gulf War. In the popular uprising against the Iraqi regime, literally tons of documents from various government institutions were
captured: these provided ample, if partly indirect and circumstantial,
evidence of the 1988 genocide. Although many questions remain
unanswered, these documents, supplemented by the testimony of
numerous eyewitnesses, provided compelling evidence in the genocide
trial against Saddam Hussein and his aides, which opened in August
2006.
The authenticity of these documents has been contested by the Iraqi
government, but it is extremely unlikely that they are forgeries. They not
only form a complex network of interlocking texts of a highly bureaucratic nature, but, in many cases, they closely match the testimony provided by eyewitnesses and survivors. References to government actions
are often quite indirect or opaque; thus, few documents openly refer to
mass executions or chemical weapons. Even internal documents, as a
rule, euphemistically speak of “special attacks” and “special ammunition” when referring to chemical warfare, or of “return to the national
ranks” when talking about individual or collective surrender to government forces.
 Taken together, the testimony and the documentary evidence provide
detailed insight into the chain of command and, to a lesser extent, into
the motives of the perpetrators. Among the personnel participating in
them were the first, second, and fifth army divisions; General Security;
and numerous members of the Baath Party (in particular, those associated with the Northern Affairs Bureau), as well as irregular troops
mostly provided by Kurdish tribal chieftains (during the 1980s, the Baathist government had appointed local tribal leaders as mustashars or
“advisors” to form irregular troops, and supplied them with arms and
money to control the Kurdish countrywide).
 The command was firmly in the hands of al- Majid, who acted as the
head of the Baath Party’s Northern Bureau, and who overruled all other
authorities. It appears to have been the regional Baath Party apparatus,
rather than the intelligence services, the police, or the army, that was at
the heart of the operations. In all likelihood, the firing squads also consisted first and foremost of Party members.
 The story of how Saddam’s regime managed to get away with these
crimes remains to be told. From 1988 to the present, the moral and legal
significance of the Anfal operations has tended to be overruled by political interests. In 1988 Iraq enjoyed near- impunity on the international
stage because of its war with the universally disliked Iran, and because of
the strategic and economic interests that both Western and Eastern Bloc
countries had in Iraq; the Baath regime cleverly played on such interests
and on divisions within the appropriate UN bodies, and consequently
managed to avoid any meaningful condemnation by the international
community. Following the 1991 uprising, massive and detailed evidence
of the Anfal became available; this included captured government documents, eyewitness accounts, and forensic evidence. For years, Human
Rights Watch tried in vain to have a genocide case against Iraq opened
at the International Court of Justice, but no country was willing to initiate legal proceedings—due, in part, to a fear of jeopardizing their
chances both in regard to dealing with the Iraqi market (bound to be 
lucrative again once UN sanctions were lifted) and in the Arab world at
large. In July 1995, U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher signed a
communique declaring that the Anfal operations amounted to genocide,
thus endorsing Human Rights Watch’s attempts to initiate legal proceedings. As a result, the U.S. government undertook a campaign to
have Hussein indicted for genocide and crimes against humanity, largely
on the basis of the captured Anfal documents. It was, however, pursued
erratically and appeared to reflect changing U.S. policies toward Iraq
rather than any principled concern for the victims or for international
law. Ultimately, no effective juridical steps were ever taken.
 In 2003 the United States attacked Iraq, launching a war that was
legitimated primarily by Iraq’s alleged possession of weapons of mass
destruction (which were never discovered, and which the Bush Administration had repeatedly been told by weapons experts would likely never
be discovered since there was good reason to believe that Iraq did not
possess them), and hardly, if at all, by Iraq’s actual use of those weapons
against Iraqi civilians. Moreover, the fact that some members of the
George W. Bush (2000–2008) Administration in the United States had
in the 1980s actively supported the Iraqi regime, and had continued to
do so at the time it was committing its worst atrocities, made this
administration’s moral arguments for war unconvincing.
 Information about the Anfal and about Iraq’s use of chemical
weapons had been gathered, in part at great personal risk, by authors
like the Kurdish researcher Shorsh Rasool, the British journalist Gwynne
Roberts, and the U.S. diplomat Peter Galbraith; but it was the capture by
Kurdish guerrilla forces of some 18 metric tonnes of documentary evidence in 1991 that provided the most compelling evidence for both the
extent of and the genocidal intent behind the Anfal operations. It is
unclear how much additional material was captured from the archives
of government ministries, security agencies, and Baath Party offices in
the chaotic aftermath of the 2003 invasion, and in whose hands these
documents ended up—especially the archives of the security office in
Kirkuk, which appears to have been the Anfal’s nerve center, would
seem crucial, both for legal proceedings and for further research into the
precise conduct and character of the operations.
 In August 2003 Ali Hasan al- Majid was arrested; in December of the
same year, Saddam Hussein was captured by U.S. troops in Iraq, with
the cooperation of local forces. Following some legal wrangling as to
when, where, and how trials against members of the former Baath
regime should be held, it was decided to have them stand trial in Iraq
itself, even though the country’s judiciary was hardly prepared for such
a massive and complicated operation. In October 2005 court proceedings against Saddam Hussein were initiated. The first trial centered 
exclusively on an isolated incident, the massacre of 148 Shiite men in
reprisal for an assassination attempt against Saddam during a visit to the
village of Dujail. Although minor in comparison with numerous other
accusations, the Dujail case was relatively well supported by documentary evidence and eyewitness testimony, and promised a speedy
condemnation.
 In August 2006, the Anfal trial started against Saddam Hussein, Ali
Hasan al- Majid, and several other defendants. Court proceedings were
often tumultuous, and even involved the removal of the chief judge for
alleged bias in favor of Saddam. Numerous survivors, however, got a
chance to testify against the former dictator. Although Saddam rarely
denied the testimony brought against him outright, he repeatedly complained that he had not been given a chance to respond to the charges. It
is true that he never did get to hear the documentary evidence.
 In the Dujail trial, the death penalty had been demanded, and Saddam
Hussein was executed in December 2006. As a result, the Anfal trial
against him was left unfinished, much to the chagrin of numerous local
and international observers; apparently, political pressures for a speedy
execution of Saddam Hussein outweighed the demand for a full legal
proceeding concerning the Anfal.
 Subsequently, in June 2007, Ali Hasan al- Majid was condemned to
death, together with two others, for genocide, war crimes, and crimes
against humanity. Following an appeal procedure, al- Majid was executed in January 2010.
 International human rights organizations not only expressed doubts
about the fairness of these trials; they also bemoaned the fact that
Saddam was executed before he could properly be called to account for
his role in the Anfal operations. The Anfal trials had many other flaws,
not least the fact that they were conducted under continuing U.S. occupation, which technically rendered them void under international law.
Although there are few if any outright denials of the Anfal’s genocidal
character, the murderous violence that emerged in post- 2003 Iraq has
likewise tended to distract attention from the enormity of the Baath
regime’s crimes. Because of these and other flaws, there is a risk that the
Anfal trials may be remembered internationally, and especially in the
Arab world, as a case of victor’s rather than victim’s justice.
 There has been significant international judicial corroboration of the
genocide claim, however. In December 2005, the Dutch merchant Frans
van Anraat, who had sold chemicals to Iraq during the 1980s, was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment for complicity in war crimes, in particular the March 1988 attack against Halabja. Although van Anraat
himself was cleared of complicity on charges of genocide, the court ruled
that the Halabja attack did in fact constitute an act of genocide. The
international juridical implications of this ruling may be substantial,
given the obligations that genocide creates under international law.
 Van Anraat’s condemnation is only an isolated case, however; there
are many other individuals, companies, and government officials in
numerous countries who still have much to answer for. Thus, in A Poisonous Affair, Joost Hiltermann (2007) deplores the fact that the
Reagan and Bush Sr. Administrations have never been called to
account for their tacit approval, if not active encouragement, of Iraq’s
use of chemical weapons against both Iranian military and Iraqi civilians. The full extent of international complicity in Saddam’s numerous
crimes is still far from adequately known, and may never be completely revealed; but to uncover this complicity in more detail, a sustained and concerted international effort will be necessary. At present,
however, there appears to be little will or popular pressure to call those
responsible to account.
Eyewitness Accounts
To date, there is little available about the Anfal in the way of eyewitness evidence in Western languages. Important works, like Ziyad
Abdulrahman’s Tuni Merg (Dungeon of Death) and Shorsh Resool’s
Dewlety Iraq u Kurd (The Iraqi State and the Kurds), are available only
in Kurdish. The main source for published accounts is Human Right
Watch’s Iraq’s Crime of Genocide (1995), from which Accounts 2 and
5 below have been taken. In the future, further testimony that has
served as the basis for this report may be made public. Other eyewitness accounts appear in Kanan Makiya’s Cruelty and Silence (1993),
especially the lengthy (and harrowing) interview with Abdallah, at first
believed to be the sole survivor of the execution squads (see Accounts
1 and 3). More recent studies that make extensive use of testimony
from survivors (mostly female) are Choman Hardi’s Gendered Experiences of Genocide (2010) and a series of articles by German scholar
Karin Mlodoch. Account 4 was recorded by the author and has not
previously been published.
Account 1: The Chemical Attacks
This account, by Abdallah Abdel- Qadir al- Askari, who survived the
attack on Guptepe (or “Goktepe” according to Human Rights Watch),
provides a sense of the horrors of the chemical attacks. This is excerpted
from Makiya’s Cruelty and Silence (1993, p. 135). Note: for additional
testimony from al- Askari, see Human Rights Watch’s Iraq’s Crime of
Genocide (1995, pp. 118, 142, 154–155, 156–157).
On the evening of May 3 [1988] the situation in my village, Guptapa, was
not normal. We had heard that the regime was preparing a chemical
attack, but we didn’t know when they would strike. It felt like there were
unusual army maneuvers. Late in the afternoon with my brother- in-law
and two friends—both teachers like myself—I climbed from our farm,
which is on lower ground, to the highest point of the village. We wanted to
see what was going on. Two inspection planes flew over. They threw out
flares to determine the direction of the wind. Then another group of planes
came, we think about 18 of them. The explosions were not very loud,
which made me guess they were chemical bombs. When we raised our
heads, we saw the sandy brown and grey clouds billowing upward. My
background as a chemist left me in no doubt this was a chemical attack.
 We climbed to the highest spot possible even though the wind was
taking the gas away in the opposite direction. From there I shouted
down to the people in the village: “This is a chemical attack! Try to
escape! Come up the hill, come up here!” A lot of people did come to
where we were and were saved. But a lot remained in the areas affected
by the chemicals.
 We discussed what to do. I thought we should wait 10 or 15 minutes,
then go down. If we went at once, we too would be in danger and unable
to help the others. But my friends wouldn’t listen. So, we went down to
the back of the village where the gases had not permeated and a lot of
people were gathered. Some were very disturbed; one man shouted at
me, “You have lost everybody; they are all killed. They have been
bombing your house.” This made me worried; I wanted to go back to my
house but we hadn’t waited long enough. Only three minutes had passed
of the time I had fixed in my mind as the minimum.
 The poison used in Guptapa in my opinion wasn’t a single gas; it was
composed of several gases. The combination affects the muscles, making
them rigid and inflexible. In two minutes it can kill a person.
 Finally I could run to my house. It was 20 minutes before sunset.
When I got there it was entirely dark, but I found a small flashlight. First
I put on a gas mask to protect myself. Then I went to the shelter which I
had prepared for just such an eventuality. My wife knew that this was
where the family should hide in case of chemical attack. Nobody was
there. I became really afraid—convinced that nobody had survived. I
climbed up from the shelter to a cave nearby, thinking they might have
taken refuge there. There was nobody there, either. But when I went to
the small stream near our house, I found my mother. She had fallen by
the river; her mouth was biting into the mud bank.
 All the members of my family had been running toward this stream
because I had told them that water is good against chemical weapons. By
the time they reached the stream, a lot of them had fainted and fallen 
into the water. Most of them had drowned. I turned my mother over;
she was dead. I wanted to kiss her but I knew that if did, the chemicals
would be passed on. Even now I deeply regret not kissing my beloved
mother.
 I continued along the river. I found the body of my 9-year- old daughter hugging her cousin, who had also choked to death in the water. Then
I found the dead body of another niece, with her father. I continued
along the stream. I found a woman who wasn’t from our family and
heard a child groan under her. Turning the woman over, I found the
child; the water had almost reached him. I took the boy’s clothes off,
took him inside, and bundled him up in other clothes.
 Then I went around our house. In the space of 200 to 300 square
meters I saw the bodies of dozens of people from my family. Among
them were my children, my brothers, my father, and my nieces and
nephews. Some of them were still alive, but I couldn’t tell one from the
other. I was trying to see if the children were dead. At that point I lost
my feelings. I didn’t know who to cry for anymore and I didn’t know
who to go to first. I was all alone at night.
 I saw one of my brothers: his head was tilted down a slope. My wife
was still alive beside him, and my other brother was on the other side.
My two daughters, the 6-month- old baby and the 4-year- old, were both
dead. I tried to move them, to shake them. There was no response. They
were both dead. I just knew they were dead.
 My brothers and my wife had blood and vomit running from their
noses and mouths. Their heads were tilted to one side. They were groaning. I couldn’t do much, just clean the blood and vomit from their
mouths and noses and try in every way to make them breathe again. I
did artificial respiration on them and then I gave them two injections
each. I also rubbed creams on my wife and two brothers. After injecting
them, I had a feeling they were not going to die.
 Our family has 40 members. I mean, it did. Now, of that big family
we have only 15 left. Twenty- five of the beloved people of our family are
dead. Among those were my five children.
Account 2: The Transit Camps
After being gathered at local camps, deportees were taken to centralized
camps further south in Iraq. There, they were primarily in the hands of the
security forces or the Party apparatus. This piece of testimony is excerpted
from Human Rights Watch’s Iraq’s Crime of Genocide (1995, p. 147).
On the first morning, they separated the men into small groups and beat
them. Four soldiers would beat one captive. The other prisoners could
see this. About 15 or 20 men were in each group that was taken a little
way off to be kicked and beaten with sticks and [electric] cables. They
were taken away in the early morning and returned in the afternoon.
The soldiers did not gather the men by name, but just pointed, you, and
you, and so on. They were Amn [security personnel] from Tikrit and
Kirkuk—butchers, we know them. When one group of beaten men
returned, they took another and beat them. That night, I was in a group
of ten or twelve men that was taken out and blindfolded with our hands
tied behind us. They took us in three or four cars to somewhere in Tikrit.
We drove around all night, barely stopping. They asked me no questions. The captured men could not talk to one another. Everyone was
thinking of his own destiny. Of the ten or twelve they took out that
night, only five returned.
 The next night, when I was back in the hall, Amn came and asked for
men to volunteer for the war against Iran. Eighty men volunteered. But
it was a lie; they disappeared. A committee was set up by Amn to process
the prisoners, who were ordered to squat while the Amn agents took all
their money and put it in a big sack. They also took all our documents.
The Amn agents were shouting at us to scare us. “Bring weapons to kill
them,” said one. “They are poor, don’t shoot them,” said another. And
another: “I wish we had killed all of them.”
 Later that night the Amn came back and took all the young men
away. Only the elderly remained. The young men were taken away in
Nissan buses, ten or more of them, each with a capacity of 45 people.
Their documents had already been taken. They left nothing but the
clothes on their backs.
Account 3: The Execution Sites
This account comes from the extraordinary testimony of Taimour
Abdallah, who was taken to an execution site near the Saudi border but
managed to escape, albeit wounded. Although he did not speak any
Arabic, he found refuge with a Shiite Arab family, and eventually
managed to return to the Kurdish- held north. This excerpt is taken from
Makiya’s Cruelty and Silence (1993, pp. 185, 191–192, 195).
 Note: part of his testimony also appears in Gwynne Roberts’ 1992
BBC television documentary, The Road to Hell, which was aired in the
United States as Saddam’s Killing Fields. See chapter 9 (“The Firing
Squads”) in Human Rights Watch’s Iraq’s Crime of Genocide (1995,
pp. 160–174). See also the story of another Anfal survivor, Ako Izeddin
Sayyid Ismael from Warani near Tuz Khormatu (The Globe and Mail,
April 3, 2003) (full text at www.fas.harvard.edu/~irdp/reports/taimour.
html).

Account 4: Deportations to Nuqrat al- Salman
This is the testimony of a 78-year- old man, originally from a village in
the Qaradagh area, who had been resettled in Takiya mujamma’a near
Chamchamal. From an interview conducted by Michel Leezenberg,
Takiya mujamma’a, spring 1992; previously unpublished.
In our village alone, six people were executed on the spot by government
troops; in the neighboring village, they shot 18 people. When they took
us away from our village, we were not allowed to take anything with
us—not even cigarette paper. After half a year, about 500 of us, mostly
the sick and the elderly, were allowed to return. Here I have the document from the camp, saying that I am allowed to go back together with
my wife and daughter. At the bottom, they have added “We have done
what we had been told to do” in handwriting. Of another family of nine
from our village, only the parents and a young daughter have returned.
There is no news about the other six. Nobody knows what has happened
to the children. They say that the truck drivers who brought them away
have all been shot. Nobody knows whether there are still people in the
Nuqrat al- Salman camp today, but they cannot possibly be alive after
four years in that heat. People were too weak, too tired, and too hungry
even to bury their dead. I’ve heard that sometimes corpses were left lying
exposed, only to be eaten by stray dogs.
 Now, we are in the Takiya mujamma’a, but we have nothing to live
from. There is one cow here, but it is not ours; we can only use its milk.
We are too old to work now, and all our belongings have been stolen by
the government. After the 1991 uprising, the government in reprisal
stopped the supply of cheap foodstuffs here. We are still afraid of them;
the day before yesterday, they shelled the mujamma’a with their artillery
fire. They can come back anytime they like. The peshmergas can’t defend
us against their heavy arms and armored cars. Some people tried to
return to their villages near the front lines, but their houses have been
bombed again soon after they had been rebuilt.
Account 5: Ali Hasan al- Majid
This interview is excerpted from Human Rights Watch, Iraq’s Crime of
Genocide (1995, p. 254). Note: the tape is dated May 26, 1988, but
according to Human Rights Watch it is more likely from 1987.
Jalal Talabani asked me to open a special channel of communication
with him. That evening I went to Suleimaniyah and hit them with the
special ammunition. That was my answer. We continued the deportations. I told the mustashars that they might say that they like their
villages and that they won’t leave. I said I cannot let your village stay
because I will attack it with chemical weapons. Then you and your
family will die. You must leave right now. Because I cannot tell you the
same day that I am going to attack with chemical weapons. I will kill
them all with chemical weapons! Who is going to say anything? The
international community? Fuck them! The international community
and those who listen to them. . . .
 This is my intention, and I want you to take serious note of it. As
soon as we complete the deportations, we will start attacking them
everywhere according to a systematic military plan. Even their strongholds. In our attacks we will take back one third or one half of what is
under their control. If we can try to take two thirds, then we will surround them in a small pocket and attack them with chemical weapons.
I will not attack them with chemical weapons for just one day, but I
will continue to attack them with chemicals for 15 days. Then I will
announce that anyone who wishes to surrender with his gun will be
allowed to do so. I will publish 1 million copies of this leaflet and distribute it in the North, in Kurdish, Sorani, Badinani and Arabic. I will
not say it is from the Iraqi government. I will not let the government
get involved. I will say it is from here [the Northern Bureau]. Anyone
willing to come back is welcome, and those who do not return will be
attacked again with new, destructive chemicals. I will not mention the
name of the chemical because that is classified information. But I will
say with new destructive weapons that will destroy you. So I will
threaten them and motivate them to surrender. Then you will see that
all the vehicles of God himself will not be enough to carry them all. I
think and expect that they will be defeated. I swear that I am sure we
will defeat them. 